<<head-css|
  .monospace {font-family: monospace}
  .linethrough {text-decoration: line-through}
  .underlined {text-decoration: underline}
  .rightcol {width: 80%}
  .rewind {color: purple}
  .manproject {color: red}
  .mandir {color: orange}
  .manchap {color: red}
>>

=html_of_wiki
//##html_of_wiki## is a static website generator supporting wikicréole 1.0, designed for GitHub pages and used by the Ocsigen project for managing its online documentation at [[https://ocsigen.org]].//

It is available as an opam ([[https://opam.ocaml.org/]]) package.

The following sections describe:

# The wikicréole format
# How to use ##ohow##, a wikicréole compiler to HTML
# How to use
## ##dop## for generating the documentation of a whole project's version, and
## ##quickdop## for generating the documentation of a whole project's.
# The available extensions
# A brief introduction to ##html_of_wiki##'s internals

=The wikicréole
==The standard
The following picture summarizes the wikicréole 1.0 format.

<<a_img src="wiki.jpg"|>>

**Notes**:
* The wikicréole supported by ##html_of_wiki## uses only one {{{=}}} sign for toplevel headings.
* There is also the tilde character {{{~}}} for not interpreting the character it prefixes.

==Syntax additions
===Supported links syntaxes
The following table lists additional link syntaxes supported by the tool.
|=Syntax                    |=Description                                |
|{{{[[wiki("name"):page]]}}}|Link to the ##page## of the project ##name##|
|{{{[[wiki:page]]}}}        |Link to the ##page## of the current project |
|{{{[[site:page]]}}}        |Website root-relative link                  |
|{{{[[href:path]]}}}        |Raw ##href## value                          |

The following table lists available links abbreviations.
|=Abbreviation    |=Equivalent syntax    |=Description              |
|{{{[[]]}}}       |{{{[[href:.]]}}}      |Current page              |
|{{{[[#anchor]]}}}|{{{[[href:#anchor]]}}}|Current page with anchor  |
|{{{[[/path]]}}}  |{{{[[site:path]]}}}   |Website root-relative link|
|{{{[[path]]}}}   |{{{[[href:path]]}}}   |Relative link             |

===Decorations
The following table lists the additional available decorations.
|=Syntax|=Description|=Example|
|{{{--}}}|//en-dash//|--|
|{{{---}}}|//em-dash//|---|
|{{{##text##}}}|Mono-spaced font|##text##|
|{{{^^super^^}}}|Superscript|text^^super^^|
|{{{,,sub,,}}}|Subscript|text,,sub,,|
|{{{__text__}}}|Underline|__text__|
|{{{/-text-/}}}|Strike-through|/-text-/|

===Definition lists
The following code produces a definition list.
{{{
;title1
:definition1
;title2
:definition2
}}}

;title1
:definition1
;title2
:definition2

===Inline HTML classes
It is possible to inline some HTML classes to the following element using the syntax ##~@~@class="title"~@~@##.

===Extensions
The wikicréole supported by ##html_of_wiki## support **extensions**, that is to execute arbitrary OCaml code registered to the parser.
More detail about this mechanism can be found in the last section of this document.

Extensions syntax: {{{<<extension attr1="val1" attr2="val2"|content>>}}}

Here are some common, widely used by Ocsigen's documentation extensions:
; {{{<<a_manual }}}
: TODO

=How to use ##ohow## (one_html_of_wiki)
**one_html_of_wiki** is a CLI tool for generating a //single// HTML document from a //single// wikicréole file.

==Basic usage
{{{
$ ohow file.wiki # generates file.html
$ ohow -o somename.html file.wiki # generates somename.html
$ ohow --help # shows help
$ ohow --version # shows version
$ ohow --print file.wiki # prints the HTML to stdout instead of writing a file
$ ohow --headless file.wiki # do not include HTML head nor wrapping body tag
$ ohow --local file.wiki # generate local-navigation compatible links (REMOVE THAT FOR DEPLOYMENT)
}}}

==Advanced usage
===Templates
one_html_of_wiki supports the use of //templates//. A template is a classic wikicréole file which contains a (unique occurrence of) {{{<<content>>}}} somewhere. It is where the content will be inserted.

Consider the following example for a deeper understanding on how to use templates:
{{{
$ cat template.wiki
<<head-css|
    .red {color: red}
    .blue {color: blue}
>>
@@class="red"@@Before.
<<div class="around"|
    <<content>>
>>
@@class="red"@@After.
$
$ cat page.wiki
I'm a wiki page, providing some <<span class="blue"|**useful**>> content!
$
$ ohow --template template.wiki --print page.wiki
<html><head><title></title><meta charset="utf8"/><style>
    .red {color: red}
    .blue {color: blue}
</style></head><body><p class="red">Before.
</p><div class="around"><p>I'm a wiki page, providing some
<span class="blue"><strong>useful</strong></span> content!</p></div>
<p class="red">After.</p></body></html>
$
}}}

====wiki_in_template
If the template has to contain more than one {{{<<content>>}}} tag or if several templates have to be used, the integration of ##wit## to your workflow has to be considered.
//wiki_in_template// (##wit##) is a simple CLI tool for inserting content inside templates without converting them into HTML: it only deals with wikicréole.

Here's an example of how to use it to insert one page inside several templates:
{{{
$ ls
bottom.wiki hello.wiki top.wiki
$ cat hello.wiki
=Hello world!
This is the content wiki.
$ cat top.wiki
Template above.
<<content>>
$ cat bottom.wiki
<<content>>
Template below.
$
$ cat hello.wiki | wit top.wiki | wit bottom.wiki
Template above.
=Hello world!
This is the content wiki.
Template below.
$
}}}

And an example of how to insert several pages inside one template:
{{{
$ ls
title.wiki text.wiki template.wiki
$ cat title.wiki
=Hello world!
$ cat text.wiki
Some text.
$ cat template.wiki
Before first.
<<content>>
In between.
<<content>>
After.
$
$ wit <(wit template.wiki < title.wiki) < text.wiki
Before first.
=Hello world!
In between.
Some text.
After.
$
}}}

Finally, as far as ##wit## is concerned, a page is a wiki file without {{{<<content>>}}} and a template is a wiki file with at least one occurrence of {{{<<content>>}}}---so there's nothing wrong in saying that ##wit## can output a template.

A few notes:
* You cannot escape the string {{{<<content>>}}} or {{{<<content|>>}}} using the three curly braces syntax.
* You cannot write a comment with the string {{{<<content>>}}} or {{{<<content|>>}}} inside.

===Link extensions
There are several link extensions that ship with ##ohow##. They differ from the classic link syntax because they do not explicitly state where is located the resource to link. For example, {{{<<a_manual project="eliom" chapter="intro" | introduction of Eliom's docs>>}}} leads to the chapter ##intro## of the ##eliom## project //without explicitly giving the location of that page//.

Here are the available extensions:
* {{{<<a_manual>>}}}
* {{{<<a_api>>}}}, {{{<<a_api_type>>}}} and {{{<<a_api_code>>}}}
* {{{<<a_img>>}}}
* {{{<<a_file>>}}}

and the attributes they accept:
|=Attribute    |=Extensions                              |=Description                                  |=Default value   |
|##project##   |All except ##a_img## and ##a_file##      |The project of the page                       |Current project  |
|##chapter##   |##a_manual##                             |The manual chapter to link                    |None             |
|##subproject##|##a_api##, ##a_api_type##, ##a_api_code##|The targeted sub-project                      |None             |
|##text##      |##a_api##, ##a_api_type##, ##a_api_code##|Text of the produced link                     |What's documented|
|##version##   |All except ##a_img## and ##a_file##      |The version of the project containing the page|{{{latest}}}     |
|##fragment##  |All except ##a_img## and ##a_file##      |HTML fragment                                 |None             |
|##src##       |##a_img##, ##a_file##                    |The path to the resource to link              |//Required//     |

However, even if the extensions doesn't require the //writer// to explicitly give the linked resource's location, the compiler still needs to know where to find it. It is why, whenever any of these extensions is used inside a wiki document, the writer must call ##ohow## with the correct values for these options: {{{--manual}}}, {{{--api}}}, {{{--images}}}, {{{--assets}}} and {{{--root}}} (the latter defaults to the current working directory).

The //root// directory is the directory containing all wiki content for a specific project's version. For example, a project ##proj/##, with two versions, ##1.0/## and ##2.0/##, each one containing the ##man/##, ##api/## and ##assets/## directories. ##ohow## must then be called with the following options ({{{pwd = ~/user/proj/}}}):
* {{{--root 2.0/}}}
* {{{--manual man/}}} --- The path is relative to the //root// directory (not the current directory!). You could still have used {{{--manual 2.0/man/}}} (the root prefix is automatically stripped away).
* {{{--api 2.0/api/}}} --- or equivalently, {{{--api api}}}
* {{{--assets assets}}}
* ({{{--images assets}}} --- Only if you used {{{a_img}}} and that the images are in the ##assets/## directory.)

For inter-project links, ##ohow## **supposes that every projects are inside the same directory**. For example, {{{<<a_manual project="eliom" chapter="intro">>}}} will produce the following link: ##<<span class="rewind"|rewinding to the root directory>>/../../<<span class="manproject"|eliom>>/<<span class="mandir"|path to the manual directory given with {{{--manual}}}>>/<<span class="manchap"|intro>>##.
The first ##../## rewinds from the root directory into the project directory (containing all versions).
The second ##../## rewinds inside the directory containing all the projects.
It could, in practice, look like ##../../../../eliom/latest/man/intro.

html_of_wiki imposes these constraints for links because these are the constraints GitHub Pages imposes. To conclude, setting up these extensions is not as complicated as it sounds (it's roughly passing some paths to ##ohow## through command line arguments) and the benefits are huge: this way you abstract away any hierarchy between wiki pages and projects and let the compiler work out the links by itself. Thus, any structural change of your projects **will not** force you to rewrite your documentation!

===The {{{<<doctree>>}}} extension
{{{<<doctree>>}}} is an extension without parameters that inserts a menu. That menu is built by concatenating the content of all the files named ##menu.wiki## inside the //root// directory. The order is:
# the ##menu.wiki## of the manual first, if any
# the ##menu.wiki## files of the API, if any, alphabetically sorted by sub-project's name, if any

For example, for a project with a manual and two API sub-projects, the extension will look for the following files, in that order:
# ##manual/menu.wiki##
# ##api/menu.wiki##
# ##api/sub-project1/menu.wiki##
# ##api/sub-project2/menu.wiki##

The menu on the left of this text is generated using that extension.
Here is an example of what one can put inside a ##menu.wiki## file:
{{{
=##html_of_wiki##
==[[#title|Introduction]]
=The wikicréole
==[[#wikistd|Standard]]
==[[#wikiadd|Additions]]
=[[#ohow|##ohow##]]
}}}
Again, that extension requires some extra parameters---{{{--root}}}, {{{--manual}}} and {{{--api}}}---which are described above. The generated element is a {{{<nav/>}}} with {{{class="how-doctree"}}}.

===The {{{<<docversion>>}}} extension
{{{<<docversion>>}}} is an extension which inserts a dropdown list that lets the visitor select the version of the documentation to see. An example of such a widget on the left of this text.

To use it, place the versions to display in a file, say ##versions.txt##, one per line, in the expected order. Then, pass that file as an argument of ##ohow## using the option {{{--docversion}}}. If {{{--root}}}'s directory name is inside ##versions.txt##, that entry will be automatically selected.

The extension places a text---{{{"Version"}}}---and a {{{<select/>}}} element with {{{class="how-versions"}}}. Required options are {{{--root}}} and {{{--docversion}}}.

===The {{{<<client-server-switch>>}}} extension
**__WARNING__: This extension is specific to the Ocsigen project.**

To include a client/server switch, include {{{<<client-server-switch>>}}} without attributes somewhere in the template.
The data of this extension is automatically collected by either [[FIXME|dop]] or [[FIXME|quickdop]]. At a lower level, this extension requires a parameter---{{{--csw}}}---which expects a file. Inside must figure the name a all wiki files (with extension ##.wiki##), one per line, that should have a client/server switch.
[[FIXME|dop]] uses the Unix builtin {{{comm -12}}} to extract the files the sub-projects ##client## and ##server## have in __comm__on.


==Legacy support
* In previous versions of ##html_of_wiki##, projects used to have a file---##config.js##---which declaratively described these projects. Amongst that information, a field ##default_subproject## declared the {{{<<a_api*}}} ##subproject## attribute's default value. Since that file no longer exist, an option {{{--default-subproject}}} exists but is **highly deprecated**.
* That previous version also supported a special link syntax---{{{[[wiki(id):page]]}}}---in which projects were given an ID (in ##config.js##). Considered unclear, that syntax is now **deprecated**, any wiki using it will //not// compile.

=Higher level documentation generators
//one_html_of_wiki// works great for compiling one wiki page, but a project's documentation is often composed of many wiki pages for each version. However, ##ohow## is designed with the Unix philosophy in mind: **simplicity** and **composability**. This, it is very easy to integrate it in an existing workflow.

To make things even easier, we provide out of the box two higher level documentation generators:

* //doc_of_project// (##dop##) --- for generating a single version of a project
* //quick-doc_of_project// (##quickdop##) --- for generating the documentation of a project with many versions

These tools are described in detail in the following sections.

==##dop##
It is a wrapper on ##ohow## designed to generate the document of a single version of a project with a one-line command.

===Configuration file
Even if all configuration data could be passed using CLI options---as ##ohow## does---it is often more convenient to have a configuration file. Two formats are accepted: //JSON// and //plain text//. Here is an example of the same configuration file, written in these two formats:

config.json:
{{{
{
  "project": "html_of_wiki",
  "manual": "man",
  "api": "api",
  "assets": "files",
  "images": "files/images",
  "csw": false,
  "menu": true,
  "templates": ["template1.wiki", "template2.wiki"]
}
}}}

config.txt:
{{{
project   html_of_wiki
manual    man
api       api
assets    files
images    files/images
csw       false
menu      true
templates template1.wiki:template2.wiki
}}}

Note that the JSON format needs **jq** ([[https://stedolan.github.io/jq/]]) installed and in the ##PATH##.
Use the plain format if ##jq## cannot be installed. It also can be useful (thanks to its minimalism) if it needs to be algorithmically generated.
It is read by ##awk## with default settings: ##$0## should contain the key, and the other records its value. Arrays have their value separated by a colon ##:##
(in a ##PATH##-like fashion).

Before reading the configuration file you provide (if any), ##dop## will try to **infer it** by analyzing the //root// directory. If the option {{{-i}}} is given,
it will print that inferred configuration (either in JSON or in plain text). Then, if a configuration file is explicitly provided, its keys replaces the inferred ones
and the ones //not// present keep their inferred values. First check what ##dop## can infer for your organization's architecture from the doc's version its given (use the
{{{-n}}} option for not generating the docs and just do the inferring work).

The following table describes the entries recognized by ##dop##:

|=Key name|=Type|=##ohow## option|=Short description|
|##project##|string|{{{--project}}}|Project's name|
|##manual##|string|{{{--manual}}}|Manual directory (root-relative path)|
|##api##|string|{{{--api}}}|API directory (root-relative path)|
|##client##|string|---|API's client directory (real path)|
|##server##|string|---|API's server directory (real path)|
|##assets##|string|{{{--assets}}}|Assets directory (root-relative path)|
|##images##|string|{{{--images}}}|Images directory (root-relative path)|
|##csw##|boolean|{{{--csw}}}|Contains a client-server-switch?|
|##menu##|boolean|{{{--doctree}}}|Contains a doctree?|
|##templates##|string array|{{{--template}}}|List of templates|
|##default_subproject##|string|{{{--default-subproject}}}|//Deprecated//|

The ##templates## key is an array because it would be possible (thanks to ##wit##) to have several templates but this feature is not currently implemented in ##dop##. PR welcomed! ;-)

===Command-line interface
The command ##dop## accepts the following short options:

|=Name      |=Option |=Value                   |=Default value|=Description|
|Config     |{{{-c}}}|File                     |---|Configuration file|
|Config type|{{{-t}}}|{{{json}}} or {{{plain}}}|{{{plain}}}|Configuration file type (format)|
|Clean      |{{{-k}}}|Flag                     |---|Do not clean wikis after compilation|
|Inferred   |{{{-i}}}|Flag                     |---|Print inferred configuration|
|Used       |{{{-u}}}|Flag                     |---|Print used (final) configuration|
|No run     |{{{-n}}}|Flag                     |---|Dry run (no compilation)|
|Root dir   |{{{-r}}}|Name                     |{{{_dop}}}|Root directory (output directory)|
|Force      |{{{-f}}}|Flag                     |---|Removes root dir if exists|
|Local      |{{{-l}}}|Flag                     |---|Generate local links ({{{--local}}})|
|Docversion |{{{-d}}}|File                     |---|{{{docversion}}} files (see {{{--docversion}}} option)|
|Verbose    |{{{-v}}}|Flag                     |---|Verbose|
|Help       |{{{-h}}}|Flag                     |---|Show help and exit|

===Examples
====Minimal example
{{{
$ tree
.
├── 1.0
│   └── manual
│       └── intro.wiki
└── 2.0
    ├── api
    └── manual
        ├── intro.wiki
        └── other.wiki
$ dop 2.0
$ tree
.
├── 1.0
│   └── manual
│       └── intro.wiki
├── 2.0
│   ├── api
│   └── manual
│       ├── intro.wiki
│       └── other.wiki
└── _dop
    ├── api
    └── manual
        ├── intro.html
        └── other.html
}}}

====More examples
You can look at the files called {{{.howdocgen}}} inside the {{{wikidoc}}} branch
of each documented Ocsigen project for a real demonstration.


==##quickdop##
To make things easier for projects with multiple versions of the documentation,
html_of_wiki provides {{{quickdop}}}. It takes care of generating the docs for
version found (directory name matching {{{[0-9]+|dev}}}) and provides automatically
a value for the {{{--docversion}}} option.

===Usage
{{{
quickdop [-f] PROJECT OUTDIR [DOP_OPTIONS]
}}}

;{{{PROJECT}}}
:The directory containing the versions.
;{{{OUTDIR}}}
:The build directory. Automatically created and replaced when the {{{-f}}} option is provided.
;{{{DOP_OPTIONS}}}
:The options usually passed to {{{dop}}}. Obviously, the options {{{-r}}}, {{{-d}}} and the target are provided by {{{quickdop}}} and must not be explicitly given.